Add blog post for `--override-env` and draft references (#20350)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/preview-esc-environment-changes-with-draft-references/index.md

---
title: "Preview ESC Changes with Environment Overrides"
date: 2026-07-17
draft: false
meta_desc: "Preview a proposed ESC environment change against your stack before you promote it, using draft references and the new --override-env flag."
feature_image: feature.png
authors:
    - sean-yeh
tags:
    - esc
    - features
    - configuration-management
category: product
schema_type: auto

# Social media copy — auto-posted to X, LinkedIn, and Bluesky when merged to master.
# Character limits: X ~280, Bluesky 300, LinkedIn 3000. Leave blank to skip a platform.
social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:
    bluesky:
---

[Pulumi ESC](/docs/esc/) makes it easy to store configuration and secrets for your Pulumi programs, and with [Approvals for ESC](/docs/esc/concepts/approvals/) you can review and approve changes before they go live. The new `--override-env` flag lets you preview any environment change, including an unapproved draft, to see exactly how it would affect your stack before it becomes the latest version.

<!--more-->

## Example scenario

> Let's say your team uses ESC for storing configuration for your production app, and your team decides to use Approvals for ESC for more safety and control. Every config change requires signoff by a teammate before going live, ensuring a bad value doesn't make it into your critical infrastructure. This is working great, but one part of the puzzle is missing: how can the reviewer adequately validate the config change before approving?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your team stores production app configuration in ESC and has enabled [Approvals](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/esc/concepts/approvals/) to keep bad values out of critical infrastructure. But one important question remains: how can reviewers properly validate a configuration change before approving it?
```

I think we can make this paragraph more "opinionated" like "this is the right way of doing things"

## Introducing: draft references and the --override-env flag

> We are introducing a new `--override-env` flag to the Pulumi CLI that works for all Pulumi operations that can consume ESC environments: `preview`, `up`, `refresh`, and `destroy`. This makes it super easy to test config changes on the fly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are introducing a new `--override-env` flag to the Pulumi CLI that works with every Pulumi operation that can consume ESC environments: `preview`, `up`, `refresh`, and `destroy`. This makes it easy to test configuration changes on the fly, giving your team the confidence to validate them as part of the review process.
```

---
title: "Preview ESC Changes with Environment Overrides"
date: 2026-07-17
draft: false
meta_desc: "Preview a proposed ESC environment change against your stack before you promote it, using draft references and the new --override-env flag."
feature_image: feature.png
authors:
    - sean-yeh
tags:
    - esc
    - features
    - configuration-management
category: product
schema_type: auto

# Social media copy — auto-posted to X, LinkedIn, and Bluesky when merged to master.
# Character limits: X ~280, Bluesky 300, LinkedIn 3000. Leave blank to skip a platform.
social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:
    bluesky:
---

> [Pulumi ESC](/docs/esc/) makes it easy to store configuration and secrets for your Pulumi programs, and with [Approvals for ESC](/docs/esc/concepts/approvals/) you can stage changes before they go live. But until now, there was no easy way to see how a proposed change would actually affect your stack. With the new `--override-env` flag, you can preview any environment change, including an unapproved draft, before it becomes the latest version.

Reviewer 2: Is "stage changes" the best terminology here? I feel like "review and approve" might be better (paraphrased from https://www.pulumi.com/blog/approvals-in-pulumi-esc/)

> [Pulumi ESC](/docs/esc/) makes it easy to store configuration and secrets for your Pulumi programs, and with [Approvals for ESC](/docs/esc/concepts/approvals/) you can stage changes before they go live. But until now, there was no easy way to see how a proposed change would actually affect your stack. With the new `--override-env` flag, you can preview any environment change, including an unapproved draft, before it becomes the latest version.

Reviewer 2: > But until now, there was no easy way to see how a proposed change would actually affect your stack. With the new `--override-env` flag, you can preview any environment change, including an unapproved draft, before it becomes the latest version.

Maybe change this to be more positive and more concise?

> The new `--override-env` flag allows you to preview any environment change, including an unapproved draft, to see how the change would actually affect your stack.

<!--more-->

## Example scenario

Let's say your team uses ESC for storing configuration for your production app, and your team decides to use Approvals for ESC for more safety and control. Every config change requires signoff by a teammate before going live, ensuring a bad value doesn't make it into your critical infrastructure. This is working great, but one part of the puzzle is missing: how can the reviewer adequately validate the config change before approving?

## Introducing: draft references and the --override-env flag

> We are introducing a new `--override-env` flag to the Pulumi CLI that works for all Pulumi operations that can consume ESC environments: `preview`, `up`, `refresh`, and `destroy`. This makes it super easy to test config changes without modifying your stack config.

Reviewer 2: > This makes it super easy to test config changes without modifying your stack config.

This seems off to me. "modifying your stack config" is technically a way to work around this I suppose but seems somewhat tangential to what this is solving.

Author: how about `This makes it super easy to test config changes on the fly` ? or just `This makes it super easy to test config changes`

### Example usages

The basic usage is `--override-env <env>=<replacement>`, and you can override multiple environments at once!
In this example, we are running a `pulumi preview` with environments `app/myenv` and `app/myenv2` replaced by their draft versions (denoted by `@draft:<draft-id>`).

```
pulumi preview \
  --override-env "app/myenv=app/myenv@draft:123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000" \
  --override-env "app/myenv2=app/myenv2@draft:123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000"
```

The `--override-env` flag not only works with draft references, but for any environment too! Here is an example of deploying your stack with your AWS test environment:

```
pulumi up --override-env "aws-login/prod=aws-login/testing"
```

> Note: `--override-env` can also override environments that are imported (directly or indirectly) from the ESC environment in your stack config. This is especially useful if you have access to an imported environment but not the root environment.

Reviewer 2: > This is especially useful if you have access to an imported environment but not the root environment.

When would this be the case? I'm not following.

Author: I guess this might be more of a niche use case (the stack is configured with an environment you don't control that imports yours) - i can reword this to be more general

Reviewer 2: What access do you have to the root environment in this case? Open but not edit and this allows you to override the imported env so that somewhat allows you to bypass that access limitation?

Author: you can have open but not edit

## When to use it

- Validate a draft ESC environment with your stack before approving

> - Preview a proposed environment change on a PR as part of a CI check

Reviewer 2: > on a PR as part of a CI check

Is this a PR that is generated automatically after a draft is created or something? I'm not following how this is a realistic use case.

Seems like we could call out automating the preview that fires off of an env draft being created?

Author: I was picturing some flow using PSP but maybe that's too specific. ill come up with more general examples

Reviewer 2: I'm not against specific examples (and would rather be tangible than hand wavy)! I just didn't understand how this would work on first read.

> - One-off debugging without editing stack config

Reviewer 2: Do we expect one off / local debugging to actually happen by creating a draft and referencing the draft rather than setting in stack config? Seems unrealistic to me but maybe for SBC this is the case?

Author: I think this is a valid use case - we had a use case internally for this (where we wanted to override an imported environment)
